Regie Cabico: We are going to get started with our next program, which is called My H'Oprah, um discussions on Filipino American identity and queerness.
I am Regie Cabico, um if you were here a little bit earlier you saw capturing fire, queer, immigrant, queer, poets speaking.
And so right now it gives me great pleasure because I have this opportunity to delve more into the Filipino Queer identity, with Jerrica Escoto. Um, He and I are really excited to be here, if you don't know what On the Move is,
um, it is the examination of American culture that's been shaped by the movement of people to and within the United States.
On the Move creates an understanding of the resilience of heritage, the many shapes of community and identity and the creative potential intentions between past and future.
Big Big Big shoutout to Sochin Kim and Olivia Caraval and Amalia and all of our fabulous, um, sponsors the Smithsonian Latino Center, Asian Pacific American Center,
Triple A, it's not what you think, it's the American Anthropological Association, with the collaboration of Anacostia Community Museum, National Museum of American History, On The Move Advisory Committee, Youth Advisory council,
United States Citizen Citizenship and Immigration Services, National Park Service and WAMU.
Big big shoutout to all of you who are here. So, um Jerrick and I are going to do stories and poems,
we are going to go back and forth, and then we are going to have a little bit of a dialogue and so we hope at the end we hope to hear from some of you.
Learning to be my father's son.
You were a caribou lifting rice sacks under the Pangasinan sun,
a handsome sailor on his way to Greece.
Instead found a Filipino nurse who hummed Elvis tunes.
She thought America would be a technicolored beach,
but she arrived during the coldest Baltimore winter surprised by foods like pizza.
You bought a house with a fireplace. It was romantic, mom said.
While mom worked late shifts, you watched basketball. The bounce of your belt breaking me when I was 3.
For twisting the controls of the portable TV, called me destroyer.
You fed me the finest adobo, stews of blood garlic chili peppers.
When driving me to piano lessons, you said you can never eat a piano.
Dad, you can turn so red and jolly, you convinced all the neighbors that you should play Santa Claus,
when you were really hiding a temper that left fists through doors.
The house you bought is boarded up with too many holes to be sold.
The gorgeous cherry tree you killed with insecticides gone too.
Did you even know what you were doing, Pisces man?
Lover of seas, whose hot spit I felt on my cheek the day my head split bloody beaten by the boy across the streets.
You lifted me by the neck, told me how you were slapped by Japanese bayonets.
"Don't cry. It doesn't hurt." Shaking me like a wet umbrella.
I wanna know if you ever saw me dad.
You hiding behind sunglasses in the hammock.
You who made your boy rub your back for a nickel, I am tired of growing fat like you.
Now that you become that apathetic sack of rice buried in the fields.
What can I do to make it worth the miles.
I wanna play a sonata of love for you.
Arpeggios of anger scaling 32 years of tears for you.
Metronome clicks for disappointment in you.
My hands reached out to lift you, higher than the volcanoes where Gods gave men rice.
And from the altitudes of Angels,
I am not afraid to say,
I've come home.
Speaker 1: [[Clapping]] Alright, lets give it up for Jerrica Escoto!
[[BG, Clapping]]
Jerrica Escoto: Ah yes, for those of you who were here, 1:20-ish. Uhm I did a My American Father poem part 1 and so I'm gonna read part 2.
Jerrica Escoto: I slept in your bedroom the night that you were in the hospital. Mom woke me up in the middle of the night and asked me to fill in your space and suddenly,
Jerrica Escoto: I became your substitute on a California King that wasn't big enough for her to feel safety without you
Jerrica Escoto: Dad, when you sleep, you lie on your side and moving. I've told you that you never needed to waste all that money on such a big bed but you wanted to dream on something bigger
Jerrica Escoto: You thought maybe sleeping like a king would get you closer to the American dream but instead it was only the bed you crawled out of every morning
Jerrica Escoto: to a job where white men speak to you much louder that necessary because of your brown skin.
Jerrica Escoto: You told me to remember that not all white folks are racist but they also expect us to be quiet and when they do.
Jerrica Escoto: You told me to never be afraid to get loud. Why was I always so able to scream at strangers before ever whispering "I love you" to you ?
Jerrica Escoto: The night I found out you had a stroke, I sat on my couch and remembered all the times I should have hugged you,
Jerrica Escoto: instead of walking out on you when you tore down your
Jerrica Escoto: walls as my father and begged me to let you in. And now the tension between us is so thick that not even a stroke can cut through the air and I'm scared
Jerrica Escoto: that I won't learn how to stretch my arms towards you
Jerrica Escoto: until I learn how to do it 6 feet underground.
Jerrica Escoto: Sometimes it's not about asking whether the glass is half full or half empty, it's about realizing that there's still shit in there to begin with
Jerrica Escoto: and with every hospital visit I make, I can feel the water in our bloods start disappearing, I can see mum's half packed suitcase of her dreaming of vacations that don't include washing dishes or hanging clothes
Jerrica Escoto: The one time your kids could finally afford to buy you both tickets to Hawaii. You have a stroke 24 hours before your flight and mum called me
Jerrica Escoto: embarrassed to even ask whether I thought the vacation was still possible [[one person laughs in the background]]
Jerrica Escoto: I realised then that it's not about you being in the hospital again, it was about her also wondering when the hell you two were supposed to get a break
Jerrica Escoto: the day after you got discharged, I asked mum where you where you were and she told me you left your crown on your bedside and you went to work. All
Jerrica Escoto: I could do was stand there as I watch her start unpacking here half empty suitcase and realizing this time it's not about the fact there's still shit in there to begin with
Jerrica Escoto: it's about not being able to go anywhere. It's about immigrants whose dream for something more translates to never catching a break.
Jerrica Escoto: Mother, father I want you to feel like you have the ability to go somewhere. There is no California King soft enough to comfort your callused spines.
Jerrica Escoto: I'm afraid that you'll never see that working the way you do isn't too different from actually dying
Jerrica Escoto: You don't even know what your own shadow looks like in the daytime. I'm tired of you feeling like this is the only way dreams can come true.
Regie Cabico: Jerrica Escoto [[clapping]]
Regie Cabico: Um, I'm gonna actually shift it up a little bit.
Regie Cabico: Um, I've recently worked on a new piece called "Triggers" in five acts and
Regie Cabico: it's some, it's it's those moments of race and sexual identity awkward moments that I have sublimated
Regie Cabico: over the last 17 years and so it's inspired a lot by the election and also having those moments that have been triggered.
Regie Cabico: So I am going to be reading parts 3, 4, and 5.
Regie Cabico: Acts 3 and 4. A middle school Shakespearean gender switch that leads to my Jean Valjean soliloquy
Regie Cabico: the drama teacher wants to produce a female version of Hamlet to a class that can barely stand in a circle
Regie Cabico: Before you leave she tells me I'd like to pick your brain
Regie Cabico: Which is already a phrase when said by a non-person of colour to me
Regie Cabico: brings out the Lapu Lapu Magellan warrior [[?]]
Regie Cabico: Yes?
Regie Cabico: Well, I need ways of teaching gender and sexuality to the students, can you find exercises on doing that?
Regie Cabico: It's just that I know you're in that world, you know? That world, your world, part of that world.
Regie Cabico: Part of what world? Am I the little mermaid? Shall I just ride my unicorn and call Caitlyn Jenner?
Regie Cabico: So now I am the gender Siri App?
Regie Cabico: It's our world, and if we were producing an Asian version of Cinderella
Regie Cabico: you'd want me to fetch the pumpkin-coloured rickshaw and the glass tai chi slipper.
Regie Cabico: Let me be your gay cis male Pocahontas
Regie Cabico: and run through all the colours of the rainbow to tell students what it is to be a woman in a male role.
Regie Cabico: No problem I replied
Regie Cabico: I have passed for Tibetan in Manhattan, Peruvian at the gay bar, Bombay at my fathers Barrios of Pangasinan [[?]]
Regie Cabico: Chi-Chi in Scarface, Japanese at the black pride parade, every Lyft driver's six degrees of separation
Speaker 2: and that guy on Lost
Regie Cabico: I'll never be fully American or fully Filipino
Regie Cabico: I am a poet who wants to find a Tinder match or whatever app they're on these days that ignites the rest of my life
Regie Cabico: I am addicted to people's stories and platforms to unheard voices
Regie Cabico: as many times as I've been mistaken I've had my own missteps
Regie Cabico: I've been told my Tina Turner imitations are cultural misappropriations
Regie Cabico: My poems have been called out for being gender-conforming and Bi-phobic
Regie Cabico: but I struggle to do the work to listen and dialogue
Regie Cabico: but sometimes I wanna throw my arms in the air and give up in a world that is laser-eyed and furious
Regie Cabico: Act 5. The reality shown realtime we are all in and you can't turn off
Regie Cabico: because [[tweets as soft?]] keep dancing on our heads
Regie Cabico: After the election, I host a queer storytelling show in Birmingham, Alabama
Regie Cabico: the riots have begun, I ask the queer performers how they feel about the results
Regie Cabico: we're kinda glad this happens
Regie Cabico: I can hear the Hitchcock music play and the Staccato strings strike the back of my neck
Regie Cabico: see what you fear is what we been living with on a daily basis
Regie Cabico: I think of what I learned in my theatre company, people cast their vote for what they're familiar with
Regie Cabico: not for people who are further away from them
[[applause]]
Jerrica Escoto: Um, I feel like as a second-generation and having immigrant parents,
Jerrica Escoto: there's usually a time in our life, um, hopefully earlier than adulthood, um, where you realize that
Jerrica Escoto: while your parents were chasing to whatever this American dream is,
Jerrica Escoto: um, you sort of become embarrassed of your own culture,
Jerrica Escoto: you pretend that you're not what you are to fit in,
Jerrica Escoto: you make sure your accent is right,
Jerrica Escoto: you make sure you assimilate to whatever the environment is,
Jerrica Escoto: so that you don't have to answer any questions that you actually have never really asked yourself.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, so, I wrote this poem, um, its called "For the Filipino in Me",
Jerrica Escoto: um, and this is more about the turning point in my life when I realized that it was important for me to understand
Jerrica Escoto: what it means to be Filipino, uh, what it means to be a child of Filipino immigrants,
Jerrica Escoto: what it means to be a child of someone who was in the military,
Jerrica Escoto: uh, and how that has really shaped
Jerrica Escoto: who I've become, um, and how it has shaped the person that I am to love others.
Jerrica Escoto: My name is Jerrica Anne Escoto.
Jerrica Escoto: Being the first American-born child,
Jerrica Escoto: my parents left the fate of my name to my sister,
Jerrica Escoto: who was six years old at the time.
Jerrica Escoto: She named me after her favorite cartoon: Jem and the Holograms.
Jerrica Escoto: My parents are from Pampanga, Philippines.
Jerrica Escoto: I was raised in southeast San Diego two blocks from Skyline Drive, where blues and reds fought skin till it turned black and purple.
Jerrica Escoto: I adopted cursing as my primary language, my tongue grew pointy like the stars on the American flag.
Jerrica Escoto: It didn't expand like the sun on the flag of the Philippines, until my grandmother was on her deathbed, and I had to say I love you to her in English.
Jerrica Escoto: It didn't occur to me that I had spent my whole life okay with the fact that my grandmother never really understood me.
Jerrica Escoto: In my middle school, you were either cool with the black kids or the Asian who got picked on, so this was about survival.
Jerrica Escoto: I took on a culture that did not match my golden skin,
Jerrica Escoto: took pride in being the honorary black friend in the group 'cause our own ethnicity is unappealing.
Jerrica Escoto: My ex-girlfriends are predominantly black.
How can I be attracted to a face that looks like mine when I loathe what I see in the mirror?
Jerrica Escoto: I am Filipino-American and discovering the Filipino part means castaway on this land.
Jerrica Escoto: It's hard to find myself in a nation that resembles broken puzzle pieces,
Jerrica Escoto: a home that feels more gift shop than museum.
Jerrica Escoto: When the only exposure mainstream news has on the Philippines is for Manny Pacquiao or natural disasters.
Jerrica Escoto: When the Filipino channel features commercials and game shows mimicking American pop culture,
Jerrica Escoto: When Tagalog is becoming tagalong English,
Jerrica Escoto: When even though the Spanish over a century ago,
Jerrica Escoto: there are still traces of them in our last name.
Jerrica Escoto: Our identity is endangered and I feel like I am disappearing. Where is my resolve?
Jerrica Escoto: I want to evolve into a person whose roots I shouldn't have to dig for.
Jerrica Escoto: Being second generation, doesn't have to mean being American comes first.
Jerrica Escoto: To my grandmother:
Jerrica Escoto: Kaluguran daka.
Jerrica Escoto: I love you.
Jerrica Escoto: Patawarin mo ako.
Jerrica Escoto: Please forgive me.
Jerrica Escoto: Ako pa balo no nino ako.
Jerrica Escoto: I don't know who I am yet.
Jerrica Escoto: I am still searching for the Filipino in me.
Regie Cabico: We were the first Filipino family to move into Clinton, Maryland.
Regie Cabico: It was so long ago we came in on Caribou.
Regie Cabico: I called our entrance, the little nipa hut on the prairie.
Regie Cabico: As soon as we moved into our new home, my mom who is super Catholic, a nurse, and a hypochondriac, started making the sign of the cross with Lysol.
Regie Cabico: I have two sisters named Faith and Charity. My name is Regie.
Regie Cabico: There is no hope in the family.
Regie Cabico: While I was growing up,
Regie Cabico: my mom would say, "Regie, why do you want to sleep over the neighbor's house there. Psst. They will murder you."
Regie Cabico: "Regie, why don't you practice your piano lessons."
Regie Cabico: See, my mom gave me piano lessons, 'cause like for Filipinos, it was old fashion karaoke.
Regie Cabico: A big hit was memory from Cats.
Regie Cabico: [[Reggie's mom said:]] "Reggie come on now. Play me the Cats. Your titas and titos are here to hear me sing the Cats. Psst."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "God. What is this boy? Regie, stop playing that bidgo[[video]] game bidgo [[video]] game, otherwise I'll pok-pok up your head. Psst. Come."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie replied:]] "Alright, Mom. Do do do De do do do do do de do do."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Midnight. Not a someone is crying. Mmmmmmmmm, I am beautiful dead."
Regie Cabico: My mom would sing that song off-key while everybody applauded,
Regie Cabico: with a plate of pancit noodles on their lap, sipping Pepsi and hailing her a Filipina Barbra Streisand.
Regie Cabico: [[Reggie's mom said:]] [[?]] Cabico, you sound like Barbra Streisand. You know why it is? Is because every time I play Barbra Streisand's records,"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "her voice is playing out of the speakers, and her voice is going through my body,"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "and my feet become like Barbra Streisand's, and my hands become like Barbra Streisand's, and my eyes become like Barbra Streisand's."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "And I could hear the wind of the beach of Boracay, Philippines, where the sound is like sugar and the water is blue."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Mmmmmmemory. Like the corner of my eyeeeee, that's the way we are."
Regie Cabico: Afterwards, she wouldn't sing anything else. She'd just run back to the kitchen, laugh like a smurf, and bake more pancit noodles.
Regie Cabico: At night, my mom would make me and her- my two younger sisters pray the rosary, in front of a four-foot Mary statue, standing on a huge green serpent.
Regie Cabico: I call this statue, "Our Lady of Loch Ness."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie, What is the first sorrowful mystery?"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie replied]] "Well Mom, they all range from sorrowful to boring. Could I please watch Dynasty now?"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie, if you watch Dynasty you will die nasty."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]]  "And the Blessed Mother will not put you on the honor roll."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Look at Romeo del Rosario, he's on the honor roll all the time and gonna be full scholarship at St. Christopher School of the Glorious Ascension of the Immaculate Concepcion of the Sea and Stars."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Why cannot you be too like him, anak? You are smart too."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie replied]] But mom, I don't want to go to all-boy Catholic school.
Regie Cabico: I want to go to performing arts school. The Duke Ellington School of the Arts in D.C..
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Who's a "Juke Ellington"? And, you know, Washington D.C. is so far and dangerous, someone will pok-pok your head there!"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Dad, listen to this boy talk! Don't you know that I'm making sacrifices for you and sacrifices for you all the time?"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "And you have to stay in all-boy Catholic school, see? The blessed mother gives me a sign, see?"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "My hands shake with the gift of prophecy."
Regie Cabico: Mom, that's arthritis.
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "It is not arthritis. Remember when the statue of the blessed virgin mother was in the living room?"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "And when I take a shower, the shampoo spilled on the tile and the image of the Blessed Virgin Mother."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "That is why, Our Lady of Pert Plus is watching over us. And she is talking to me."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Mm-hmm. Ahah. Tell Regie he has to go to all-boy Catholic school and tell him he has to have girlfriend later, when he is 30 years old."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Because, if he has girlfriend, it will lead him to mortal sins."
Regie Cabico: I knew about sins 'cause I went to confession every week.
Regie Cabico: Father, forgive me for I have sinned. My last confession was yesterday.
Regie Cabico: I know it's a sin to disobey your parents but I scheduled an audition at the Duke Ellington School of the Arts.
Regie Cabico: I already have a dance choreographed. I don't have a monologue but I took Jennifer Beals's monologue from the movie, Flashdance.
Regie Cabico: She really doesn't have a monologue but I strung all her lines together and it just comes under 3 minutes.
Regie Cabico: It's like a slam poem.
Regie Cabico: Well, I never made it into the Duke Ellington School of the Arts.
Regie Cabico: Instead, I went to Bishop McNamara High School, where for drama club, I got the lead in the title role play, Dracula.
Regie Cabico: But with all the white makeup on, I looked like Yoko Ono.
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie, where were you? Why are you out there rehearsing? I want you to come over here."
Regie Cabico: My mom took me to the other side of the living room where there's these huge lights.
Regie Cabico: I didn't know what it was. Maybe the Blessed Virgin Mother herself was in the living room.
Regie Cabico: And when I got close, I saw that it was a lighted glass stand with all of my awards.
Regie Cabico: Mom, what's this?
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie, this is your shrine!"
Regie Cabico: But mom, I'm just Dracula, I- I- I- I'm just a vampire. What are you talking about?
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie, I thought that because your dad is from a poor family that he will work hard."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "But instead, he's playing mahjong and drinking San Miguel beer all the time."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "I know that you'll be an actor. And if you're an actor, do not do this soap opera 'cause you will lead the people to sin."
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie, why don't you be like Oprah?!"
Regie Cabico: [[Regie's mom said:]] "Regie! You are my 'Hope-rah!'"
Regie Cabico: Thank you.
[Crowd applause]
Regie Cabico: Jerrica Escoto everyone! [[Crowd applause]]
Jerrica Escoto: It's really funny 'cause I felt like that was also my mother speaking to me.
Jerrica Escoto: Especially with the rosary. [[Laughing]] So I'm gonna do one more poem and then we're gonna start a dialogue about just what it is to be queer and Filipino.
Jerrica Escoto: I think Reggie, though, kinda nailed it in that last poem.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, I did this poem, uh...
[Pauses]
Jerrica Escoto: No, I'm gonna do a different poem. So, what I realized coming into my adulthood, and it actually took me moving away to D.C. from San Diego,
to realize that when we have immigrant parents, the dialogue of, "we sacrifice so much for you, we did so much to you,"
Jerrica Escoto: we end up internalizing that and then we end up living a life, um, that we're not sure we want to be our own.
Jerrica Escoto: Right? 'Cause if you're Filipino and you're a nurse then you've like "made it" and, uh, I'm definitely not a nurse.
Jerrica Escoto: And so with that, you kinda carry that into your personal relationships.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, relationships with partners, relationships with friends, and you end up kind of realizing that you don't really know how to, kind of, be inside of yourself
Jerrica Escoto: and love the way that you want to because you've taken on all these expectations and you don't wanna fail your parents.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, so this is a breakup poem, and um... yeah. It's about to get REALLY sad here at the National Mall.
Jerrica Escoto: Umm, okay.
Jerrica Escoto: [[ Reciting Poem]] I've kept this poem in my voice box for years now. And I clear my throat the loudest when I'm on first dates, or making love.
Jerrica Escoto: I make excuses. I say this world is already too ugly and I couldn't let another poem like this trickle, drip.
Jerrica Escoto: Like when blood stains aren't speaking loud enough for what's going on inside me.
Jerrica Escoto: I've made promises I wasn't ready to make. Said things that felt like salt on your taste buds because I wasn't ready to say them yet,
Jerrica Escoto: but when you give someone the ability to rip your soul to pieces, the most that you can do is tell yourself you're okay.
Jerrica Escoto: And hope that one day you actually mean it.
Jerrica Escoto: I've rebuilt myself-- out of material that easily get caught in the wind,
Jerrica Escoto: and I learned that this is why I never let anyone with hands full of good intentions touch me in the parts that are used to caving in.
Jerrica Escoto: I realized, the reason why I write so many breakup poems, is because I'm not done writing the one about you.
Jerrica Escoto: Sometimes love is violent. And you took your loaded insecurities and threatened me at gunpoint the whole time I loved you diligently.
Jerrica Escoto: You taught me that sometimes love isn't even really called love, it is just called perseverance. I stopped believing in gods when you became the one I prayed to, but you never listened.
Jerrica Escoto: I came to you with bloody knees and wrinkled palms from the times I pressed my hands together for you, but you never listened.
Jerrica Escoto: You only recognized your worth in funhouse mirrors and the times I unzipped my own spine and turned it into a bridge you could walk on.
Jerrica Escoto: Most days, you never really knew where you were headed and I reshaped the road maps of my life to crack enough pavement for you to follow because sometimes love isn't even really called love,
Jerrica Escoto: it is just called sacrificing your own bones and hoping that one day, you'll actually get a goddamn "thank you"-- When you left...
[[Pauses]]
Jerrica Escoto: When you left, you left the door slightly open.
Jerrica Escoto: And I have been waiting here, letting you leak out of me through my behavior, waiting for justification from you as to why you
Jerrica Escoto: felt that you had the audacity to make me fall in love with you the way that I did, but never love yourself long enough to let me.
Jerrica Escoto: I've spent too many nights throwing dictionaries against the wall for never finding the right words to get you to stop hurting me.
Jerrica Escoto: I should've borrowed yours. You always knew the right things to say to get me to disintegrate slowly.
Jerrica Escoto: I waited years for our beginning. And I know now, that sometimes love is the umbilical cord that wraps around the necks of unborn children-- sometimes things that are supposed to have a beginning die before they ever even have a chance to start,
Jerrica Escoto: and you.
Jerrica Escoto: You never let me talk long enough to realize that this isn't what love is supposed to feel like, you weren't what love was supposed to speak like--
Jerrica Escoto: Love isn't about learning how to make love with the lights off.
Jerrica Escoto: It isn't about holding on for the times when you could finally love me back--
Jerrica Escoto: I know now that sometimes love isn't even really called love, it is just called...letting go.
Regie Cabico: Jerrica Escoto. Alright -- this is really, really rare, where you can have two queer Filipino spoken word artists on stage.
Regie Cabico: Also from different coasts. As you know, I grew up here in the east coast, not far from D.C., southern Maryland.
Regie Cabico: So, we're going to start a little bit of a dialogue, and we hope that you will join in and ask questions and/or share whatever you have.
Regie Cabico: I just want to start with -- poetry is not the traditional Filipino thing, either dancing or singing.
Regie Cabico: Right, where in "Miss Saigon", you don't see us as poets. But I do wanna say that there is something in the Filipino culture, which is we call "O.A.", which is drama.
Regie Cabico: So we're full of drama, we also have a sense of humor.
Jerrica Escoto: "O.A." stands for "Over Acting".
Regie Cabico: "O.A." So like, "Regie, you're so O.A.!" So it means overacting. So I feel like, for me, I -- being a spoken word reformer, it was a way of surviving,
Regie Cabico: and it was a way to make sense of my world being Filipino-American.
Regie Cabico: I think if-- I have two siblings, we're creative in our own way. And if we didn't have that, I don't know that I would really survive.
Regie Cabico: I don't know that I could be silenced.
Regie Cabico: So, I'm writing to make sure that the Filipino stories are out there, and also so that way I could connect with all of you.
Regie Cabico: So I wanted to put that out there, just -- just to see how you respond.
Regie Cabico: Because you grew up in San Diego, where there's a lot of Filipinos.
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah, I grew up -- where we were predominantly either Filipino or black.
Jerrica Escoto: I actually didn't really meet a white person until high school, because I was constantly around people of color.
Jerrica Escoto: And it -- same thing for me. Poetry -- I was writing my whole life, and then
Jerrica Escoto: I went to a slam-- a poetry slam--  when I was 18, for a high school, like, extra-credit thing, and um...
Jerrica Escoto: I realized that it was a pathway for us to tell our stories that we didn't realize were important to tell.
Jerrica Escoto: And I'm really grateful that I found it, because oftentimes when we think our stories don't matter, whatever that story is,
Jerrica Escoto: whatever to our capacity, um, I think that we end up carrying that inside of ourself, and then we wonder why it feels so heavy sometimes.
Jerrica Escoto: Or when it gets lifted,  why we were in so much pain that whole time.
Jerrica Escoto: So poetry is definitely a healing thing. Every time I get up on a stage-- whether it's for 100 people, 1,000 people, or just 1 person-- I really take myself
Jerrica Escoto: somewhere that I don't usually go in front of my peers, or in front of my family really. And poetry is a way for me to speak to my
Jerrica Escoto: parents... when I don't really have that vulnerability to speak to them face-to-face.
Regie Cabico: Um, I also want to talk about your family, who's truly incredible. You have an other brother who's also queer and
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah.
Regie Cabico: My family is not as supportive and so um, I came out because... there was an anthology that said "Regie Cabico is a gay Filipino!" I'm like,
Regie Cabico: "Surprise everyone! Hahaha..." And this is before Will and Grace, and um, I think, being Filipino, you're also-- religion, and being an immigrant,
Regie Cabico: like you can't be different, you need to conform, you need to do this... So for me, to be a poet, was I had to break all, all ties.
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah.
Regie Cabico: So, there is still a part of me, while my sisters and-- and the younger generation's very supportive... it's great that you have... that amazing support.
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah, it-- it took my parents, um... a long time, I think maybe 10 years. So, I have 2 older sisters and a younger brother. He's only a year younger than me, um, and he's gay.
Jerrica Escoto: And so basically, what the story was, is my parents kept trying and trying for a boy. When I came out a girl, my parents, like, cried.
Jerrica Escoto: And then, they were like "One more time," and they had my brother, and my brother ended up being gay. And so my joke is, "Do you see what happens when you mess with God?"
[[Regie, some audience laughs]]
Jerrica Escoto: This is just their way at getting back at them for being uh, so disappointed.
Jerrica Escoto: But, it took them a while, even when I was engaged to my now wife-- my wife is Pakistani, and she's Muslim--
[[Audience member yells something and claps]]
Jerrica Escoto: Us growing up-- [[Jerrica laughs]] holla! Um, us growing up Catholic, um, all my parents knew about Pakistan is that
Jerrica Escoto: Muslims were the bad, stereotypical things that they see on the TV and the internet. And so, oddly my parents
Jerrica Escoto: actually ended up having to move to Bahrain, which is a Muslim state-- uh, country maybe? Both?
Jerrica Escoto: And so, they were immersed in a whole different culture, and it really allowed them to open their eyes. And now
Jerrica Escoto: we're in a great place, together. But I do identify as being trans-- this is something I've been identifying with for the past year,
Jerrica Escoto: and I have not come out to my parents for that. Just because, it took so long to get to this really nice place.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, and I'm really afraid to kind of shake the boat again-- which, really speaks to like, kind of the experience you have as second
Jerrica Escoto: generation is, you're just trying to make your parents proud of you. And so you don't really want to... expose anything to them that may disappoint them again.
Regie Cabico: And I think, on that last-- so you just want to make your parents proud of you-- I feel that, growing up, my mom looked at myself not as this human being
Regie Cabico: but as this thing. And, um, it was hard to
Regie Cabico: --sort of separate that, y'know? And when I have Filipino friends who say, "Well you're family to me," um, it sort of has...
Regie Cabico: a very warped or twisted sensibility. So for me, when I can commune and share the stage with you, it's such a, a healing process, for me--
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah.
Regie Cabico: um, to be here, and on the Mall.
Regie Cabico: Um, so, I-- I guess if you wanted to respond to that...
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah, um, I was doing spoken word poetry in a competitive place,
Jerrica Escoto: for th-- some of you don't know, there's something called poetry slam,
Jerrica Escoto: um, which is basically, we perform these poems that make us very vulnerable, that make us cry--
Jerrica Escoto: and we let strangers judge us. It's, like, the most abusive thing we could do to ourselves. [[Regie laughs]]
Jerrica Escoto: Um, but I've been doing it for 10 years, I did it nationally and internationally,
Jerrica Escoto: and I was-- I just kept competing, kept competing, but-- uh, and Regie sa-- I told Regie this before we did this show,
Jerrica Escoto: I never do poems that have to do with me being Filipino, or having immigrant parents,
Jerrica Escoto: because I know those poems don't score very well in a competitive stage.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, the poems that-- that score well, um, are very far from my identity, or um, they're a narrative that's not my own,
Jerrica Escoto: and so I don't feel comfortable saying a story that's not my own. Some people will, for the scores, um,
Jerrica Escoto: but for my own values I just don't. Um, so this is really nice, because it's really hard to find
Jerrica Escoto: um, a community of Filipino poets where all of our stories, um, are kind of aligned, and our values are aligned, and
Jerrica Escoto: um, other people can hear them, together, rather than sprinkling them every now and then.
Regie Cabico: Um, I'd love to trade it over to you-- you're such a beautiful audience, um, and so it-- it's--
Regie Cabico: with you being vulnerable on the Mall, it's hard to tell who's listening, you feel like you're on the radio,
Regie Cabico: but there's actually people... here. So I want to thank you for being very, very, um, attentive and-- and with us.
Regie Cabico: So, we'd love to trade it over to you, um, and um, we have our Folklife Festival,[[minor applause]] phenomenal, staff person here with a microphone,
Regie Cabico: So if you have any questions for us, this is our second show today and, like, right now we're--we're like--
Jerrica Escoto: Oh my god, yeah. [[both laugh]]
Regie Cabico: But we'd love to-- please energize us, and-- and, share your thoughts, or questions .
Regie Cabico: Yes.
[[Silence, barely audible murmuring]]
Audience Member: So um, it's more of a statement rather than a question, um,
Audience Member: I just wanted to say that, both of what-- [[Mic feedback]] ooh! Both of what you guys said was really amazing.
Audience Member: There aren't a lot of people, like you said, um, that are willing to put themselves out there and be vulnerable, and I think
Audience Member: both of your sessions, um, my team was here, listening to what you guys had to say.
Audience Member: And um, it was really amazing! I mean, the kind of stuff that you're saying, is not something that's usually broadcasted on the National Mall.
Audience Member: So um, more of I just wanted to say thank you for sharing your thoughts and how you feel--
Audience Member: because I think a lot of people feel the same way, and they support however you feel.
Jerrica Escoto: Thank you. And I think, um, us being on the National Mall and saying our stories is even more important because of who's in office.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, y'know I mentioned that my wife is Pakistani and her mom is still in Pakistan and is sick,
Jerrica Escoto: and uh, she wants to be able to go back home and visit, but we're in the middle of our own immigration process and so she's actually afraid she won't
Jerrica Escoto: be able to get entry back in. Um, even though Pakistan is not part of the list of countries, part of this new travel ban, it's still
Jerrica Escoto: a scary thought--
Regie Cabico: You never know what's gonna happen, like--
Regie Cabico: surprise!
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah. Right.
Jerrica Escoto: And so to-- to speak my story so very loudly on the National Mall, um, is sort of like a, a bittersweet
Jerrica Escoto: kind of experience for me, um... because ever-- ever since I moved to D.C., it's been very heavy for us,
Jerrica Escoto: and our-- every single day we have to remind ourselves to heal, and to be grateful for what we can be grateful for.
Jerrica Escoto: Because once we step outside it's a huge reminder, um, that our identities, y'know, are not really aligned with who's in office right now.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, but thank you-- yeah, for saying that. It is really important for us.
Regie Cabico: I also just wanna give a shout-out to the Smithsonian Folklife Festival-- 'cause when I asked Siachen about, well, what should we say, what should we not say,
Regie Cabico: Siachen says, "We will not censor you, say what you want, use your judgement. It's your story."
Regie Cabico: So, um, that-- that's really really powerful, too, for them to be able to say that to us. And I think we underestimate,
Regie Cabico: um, the power of free speech while we still have it, um, as poets. [[Both chuckle]]
Audience Member: So first, thank you for sharing your stories.
You both touched on how poetry has kind of been a way for you to share your own personal stories,
but you also mentioned in slam poetry, that your stories didn't necessarily score well with judges.
So I was wondering if both of you could talk about how you found
kind of a community -- of if you found a community -- within this poetry scene to
be able to safely be vulnerable and share your stories
without kind of fear of rebuke or not scoring well or whatever it is.
Jerrica Escoto: Um, I think right now Regie is my community,
we just booked a SoCal tour in August and September,
we are doing a photo shoot next week and we're just really happy to have
two powerful, Filipino, queer poets. [[clapping]] Thank you.
Regie Cabico: And I have never -- like, I'm about, 97 years old,  and I've never performed in San Diego
and so it should not be -- I shouldn't like -- I have to do it.
It's sorta like a Mecca; I have to be there.
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah, and San Diego's poetry scene is really huge,
their teams always top-- are always top five in the nation every time.
And so it was really hard being on a team.
My first team was in 2010 and I was the only Filipino on the team and all my other
teammates were African American, and my coach
had made a comment that we were an all black team.
And it just kinda affirmed for me even more that me being Filipino was really invisible,
and that -- and I didn't really know how to negotiate that because I grew up with predominately black folks and I
was so far away from my own Filipino identity
that it took me being now 29 to realize that
it really hindered my own personal and spiritual growth.
Especially in my poem that I read when my grandmother was passing away.
She was in hospice care,
and it hit me when I started saying goodbye to her in English
and I just felt this rock in my stomach when I realized
that it took her dying for me to realize that
I should have learned our native tongue.
So that we could have communicated much more.
So I think the community is still evolving;
I'm happy I have Regie here, I thought when I moved to D.C. I would retire from performing--
Regie Cabico: No, don't!
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah, but no it's great
I'm always still looking for community, right?
Not even in just the poetry space,
just to watch Game of Thrones.
Shout out to Game of Thrones fans, July 16, holla!
Yeah.
Regie Cabico: Um, I started to slam 24 years ago in 1993 at the Nuyorican Poets Café
and when I was on the slam team, I had Tracie Morris, Maggie Estep, and Hal Sirowitz and myself.
So yes, I was the young, gay, Filipino poet, but I looked at ourselves as the Avengers
just doing our thing and our poetry and I felt a little bit of community there.
I did not have community growing up, just generationally I wish that there were
queer artists that could, sort of, lead me. But I think we're talking about the AIDS epidemic and that huge gap.
So it's only in the time now that I'm finding community with the younger generation,
and so I'm trying to sort of bridge the older and the younger so we can get work done and we can move on an intergenerational shift.
But, I do have to say that it's sometimes a challenge with the younger millennial generation who, as I say is so laser-eyed and furious.
They will take apart a lot of my writing and there is some valid discussion to that,
but at the same time we need to move and we need to mobilize, we don't have time.
Like, this is, like, this is we, we've got to, like, figure it out and move together, alright? Like.
So I just wanted to say that on the intergenerational level I was talking to [[Bocea?]], about how people are offended in poetry these days by, "this was appropriation", "you did this", "this, that."
And [[Bocea?]] said "You know, my dad's 96 years old,
he's been through so many wars, he could say oriental if he wants to."
So, I just wanted to sort of give that, on how we can understand each other and to move on the intergenerational level to just, for us to get things done.
Thank you for your question }  I think there is time for one last, one last thing [[pause]] or two last things. } [[Pause]]
It's clear both of you all have a very strong identity to your Filipino culture. I'm curious whether that still is your community that you can come in or out of it. If its strong or you've actually been ostracized and have to identify with someone else either your cult--uh your uh literary community or something else. }
Um, I actually am more ostracized than I think welcomed in primary Filipino communities. A great example is th--the last-- or the second to last poem I did was actually a group piece that I did with another Filipino Poet on a National Semi-Finals stage, and at the end, Um-- I'm so--there's like 87 dialects in the Philippines and our-- our family speaks something called Kapampangan and we don't speak Tagalog
So um, and my poetry partner who did the group piece, his--his family speaks Tagalog So at the end, you know, we are saying kaluguran daka which  means "I love you" in Kapampangan I'm saying patawarin mo ako which means "please forgive me" to my grandmother.
And obviously I don't have the accent and my tongue isn't really trained to have it sound I guess pure Kapampangan and so we actually had a Filipino poet from Austin bash us on Facebook saying that we didn't have the right to be on a stage if we weren't going to be able to speak the language correctly, when the whole poem was about the fact that we were trying to find that.
We were trying to find that connection with our language, we were trying to find that connection with our ancestors and our grandparents and our parents, um and often times when I perform in an all Filipino space, I'm often seen as someone who's not too much of an activist for just solely Filipinos just because a lot of my activism
is in the broad spectrum of LGBTQ and people of color in general. So I'm not as comfortable in an all Filipino space unfortunately. The spaces that we're booked for in So Cal a lot of them are predominantly Filipino spaces, uh but for me I'm still trying to become comfortable
and trying to negotiate what it means to be uncomfortable in a space with people who look like me and much more comfortable in a space with people who don't look like me.
So it's still evolving for me for sure. }
Regie Cabico: I think Filipinos would rather see Rex Navarrete than us, um, [[laughter]]
Regie Cabico: Inside such a comedian, um, but I also feel that our topics are outside of the box,
Regie Cabico: But that's okay because I think in slam poetry, I wanna try and get you to the edge without falling off
Regie Cabico: So I'm not here to be comfortable or for your safety like, I really want you, just take you to the
Regie Cabico: the edge, the edges
Jerrica Escoto: Mmhmm [[Cross Talk]]
Regie Cabico: of my existence
Jerrica Escoto: Yeah my goal is always if [[Cross Talk]]
Regie Cabico: And to be funny too
Jerrica Escoto: I can make someone cry than I've done my job as a poet [Laughs]
Regie Cabico: Thank you so much, we will be back July 6. Give yourselves a big warm round of applause
Regie Cabico: um, hug a Filipino, um, don't believe all the Filipino cuisine that you see that's out there.
Regie Cabico: Um, sometimes it gets, um, glamourized a lot.
Regie Cabico: We're, we're the real, well anyway just hug a Filipino.
Regie Cabico: Thank you.
[[Clapping]]
[[Background noise]]
Speaker 3: Hello
Speaker 3: Great. Thank you for joining.
Speaker 3: This is the Smithsonian folk life festival. Its the 50th anniversary of the folk life festival.
Speaker 3: We're gonna take a minute to set up for the next act.
Speaker 3: San Jose Taiko is gonna be coming. They're coming from the west coast.
Speaker 3: We'll be talking about the same issues of, um of cultural art and music,
Speaker 3: and we'll be with you in just a minute.
[[Background noise]]
Speaker 1: I was told to get mango
Speaker 2: sorry. Go ahead. Yeah. Okay